 1. How does traditional deployment work
sol: you have all the deployment process described in a document. Let's say the operations team needs to deploy the app to a new environment to run the application. 
     The first thing that you need to do is to set up hardware.
     Next you need to set up the operating system on it Linux or Windows or Mac.
     After that, you need to install the right software.
     If it's a Java application, you need to install Java, If it's a Python application, install Python etc.
     After that, you need to set up the application Dependencies.
     and only after that is when you would get to installing your application.
  This is a very, very manual approach. This takes a lot of time, and there is a very, very high chance that you make mistakes. 
  The goal of Docker is to make the deployemnt easy. 
  Open Command Prompt and run           docker --version.(assuming docker is already installed)
  next run this command                 docker container run -d -p 5000:5000 in28min/hello-world-python:0.0.1.RELEASE    // run the container in port 5000. name of the container image is in28min and the image version is 0.0.1.RELEASE
  which means to run a container on a port 5000. but the questions is I don't have Python installed in here and you're trying to run a Python application.   It says unable to find image locally, so it will start downloading the image.
  it gives you some ID. 
 
  Now what has happened in the background? Let's go to the browser and type in localhost:5000. What are you seeing in here? you can see hello world Python v1.
  So we are now running a Python application on our machine. And the amazing thing is on this specific machine, Python is not installed at all. 

  Lets run below commands
     docker container ls                                                                        //  this will list the running containers
     docker container stop <id of the running container>                                        //  this will stop the container

 The docker image has everything you need to run the application like OS, Application runtime(JDK, Pythong, NodeJS etc), application code and dependencies. This image can be ran everywhere like your local machine, company's data center, cloud.
 Docker is popular because of following reasons
     1. Standardized application packaging: It has same packaging for all types of applications (Java, Python or JS)
     2. Multi platform support: Local machine, Data Center, Cloud.
     3. Isolation: Containers are isolated from one another. 

Lets understand this command          docker container run -d -p 5000:5000 in28min/hello-world-python:0.0.1.RELEASE.
      . The docker image is downloaded from Docker Registry. The default Registry is Docker Hub(https://hub.docker.com) like git Hub. in28min/hello-world-python is the repository name and 0.0.1.RELEASE is tag name or image version.
      . -p 5000:5000 is mapping a host port and a container port. Each application runs inside the container in a specific port. you can expose it on this specific machine on a different port over here. we are exposing this application
      on port 5000. The Container port 5000 is mapped to external port 5000 on the machine. Now I want to run it on a different port on the machine like on port 5001.
      How can I change that?
        The container port cannot change(app developer can change it). Only the host port can change. You can take the same application and run it on a different host port that you can do by changing 5000 to 5001. like
              docker container run -d -p 5001:5000 in28min/hello-world-python:0.0.1.RELEASE.       // running on host port 5001
        we can run multiple instances of the same image by changing host port. like
              docker container run -d -p 5002:5000 in28min/hello-world-python:0.0.1.RELEASE.      // running on host port 5002

       if we run the command    docker container ls        // we can see 2 instances of the same image running. we can verify by running localhost:5001      and localhost:5002  in browser and we can see same image is running 
      . -d is used for detach mode. That is the terminal where we execute this command is available for other use. if we dont mention -d then we can't use the terminal to run other commands. 

2. What is Docker Image? :  It is a package representing specific version of your app. it is just a set of bytes. These bytes are hosted inside the Docker registry called Docker Hub.
3. What is a Container? :   A container is a running version of that specific image. You can create 1000s of container from a single image. 
4. What is Dokcerfile? : it is a file with instructions to create Docker image. 
    example of sample dockerFile

       FROM openjdk:18.0-slim
       COPY target/*.jar app.jar
       EXPOSE 5000
       ENTRYPOINT ["java","-jar","/app.jar"]


   Every Docker image starts from a base image, and the base image which we are making use of in 1st line of dockerfile is open JDK. We want to run a Java application, and to be able to do that we need a JDK. We are making use of a 
          repository called OpenJDK and we are using a tag 18.0-slim. 
   Now what do we want to run? As part of the image, we would want to run a spring boot application. When we build a Spring boot project, the application jar will be created in the target folder. So in the local machine from the 
         target folder, we want to copy the jar file into the Docker image with a specific name. That's why we are making use of the copy command in 2nd line. So we are copying the jar which is present in the target folder as app dot jar 
         into the docker image. 
   Next, we are informing Docker about the port that the container listens on at runtime. The application we are creating listens on port 5000, so we are exposing port 5000. 
   The last command which is present in here is Entrypoint. We want to configure a command that will be run at container launch. When a container is created from this Docker image, we want to launch the application, That's why we are
   executing the command ["java","-jar","/app.jar"].





docker image ls                                                                           //   this will list the all the images present in my local machine. 
docker image list
docker --version                                                                             //  check if Docker is installed
docker container ls
docker build -t in28min/hello-world-docker:v1 .
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 in28min/hello-world-docker:v1
docker container run -d -p 5000:5000 in28min/hello-world-docker:v2

5. docker network create equifox-net
   creates a custom Docker network named equifox-net. Assigns it a private subnet (e.g. 172.18.0.0/16). Sets up internal DNS. Allows containers to communicate with each 
   other by container name. It provides easier service discovery, and is preferred over the default bridge network for production‑like setups. Isolated from other 
   Docker networks unless connected explicitly. 
   Why create a custom Docker network?
     Custom networks are better than the default bridge network because they provide:
     ✅ Automatic DNS-based container name resolution
     ✅ Better isolation
     ✅ Cleaner microservice architecture
     ✅ Easier container-to-container communication

   to verify the network run:                         docker network ls.
   to Inspect details run/Verify the connection:      docker network inspect equifox-net
   to Start a container on the network:               docker run -d --name app1 --network equifox-net nginx
                                                      docker run -d --name app2 --network equifox-net busybox sleep 1000
   app2 can ping app1 using container name:           docker exec -it app2 ping app1
   Container name = hostname. No need to know IP addresses. This does NOT work reliably on the default bridge network
   Connecting existing containers:                    docker network connect equifox-net container_name
   to disconnect containers:                          docker network disconnect equifox-net container_name

   
   Common real‑world use case:
     Example: Microservices 
              frontend  → backend  → database
              
              docker network create equifox-net
              docker run --network equifox-net --name backend backend-image
              docker run --network equifox-net --name frontend frontend-image

              Frontend can call backend as: http://backend:8080

   Optional: Creating with custom subnet. Useful when integrating with external systems. Avoiding IP conflicts
         docker network create --subnet 192.168.100.0/24 equifox-net

6. Docker Compose Networking: Docker Compose automatically creates and manages networks for multi‑container applications, so containers can discover and
   communicate with each other by service name.  
   1️⃣ Default Networking in Docker Compose:         docker compose up
      You run the command "docker compose up" from a terminal/command prompt on your machine, in the directory that contains the Docker Compose file. If the file name 
      is not docker-compose.yml, specify it explicitly:   docker compose -f fileName.yml up
      Docker Compose automatically does the following:
      ✅ Creates a default bridge network
      ✅ Attaches all services to that network
      ✅ Enables DNS-based service name resolution

      Example: Default Network
      docker-compose.yml
        version: "3.9"
        services:
          web:
           image: nginx
          api:
           image: node

     Docker Compose creates a network named: <project_name>_default
     web can reach api using: http://api
     api can reach web using: http://web
     Service name = hostname
     ❌ IP addresses should never be hardcoded
     ✅ Use service names instead

  2️⃣ Custom Networks in Docker Compose
     Custom Bridge Network Example
     version: "3.9"

services:
  frontend:
    image: nginx
    networks:
      - app-net

  backend:
    image: node
    networks:
      - app-net

networks:
  app-net:
    driver: bridge


✅ Both services communicate via app-net
✅ Fully isolated from other Compose projects

3️⃣ Multiple Networks (Advanced but Common)
    Used when: Some services must be public
               Others must stay private
    ✅ Frontend + Backend + Database Example
version: "3.9"

services:
  frontend:
    image: nginx
    networks:
      - public-net

  backend:
    image: node
    networks:
      - public-net
      - private-net

  db:
    image: mysql
    networks:
      - private-net

networks:
  public-net:
  private-net:


🔐 Result

frontend ↔ backend ✅
backend ↔ db ✅
frontend ❌ db (isolated)

4️⃣ External Networks (Using Existing Docker Networks)
   Use when: Network already exists
             Multiple Compose projects must communicate

   Example
    1. First, create the network:     docker network create equifox-net
    2. Then reference it in Compose:
version: "3.9"

services:
  app:
    image: nginx
    networks:
      - equifox-net

networks:
  equifox-net:
    external: true

✅ Docker Compose will not recreate it
✅ Ideal for shared infrastructure (API, Auth, Gateway)

5️⃣ Exposing Ports vs Networking (Important Clarification)
   🔁 Internal communication (container ↔ container)
       Service name → internal port
       backend:
          ports:
            - "8080:8080"

      ports is NOT needed for internal networking.

   🌍 External access (host ↔ container)
      ✅ Only needed to access services from your machine
       ports:
         - "8080:8080"


6️⃣ Docker Compose Network vs Docker Network
Feature                        Docker Network                   Docker Compose
Creation                       Manual                           Automaticcon
DNS                            Yes                              Yes
Service Names                  Container names                  Service names
Ease                           Low✅                            High
Scaling Support                Manual                           Built-in


7️⃣ Scaling Services (Networking Handles It)
  docker compose up --scale backend=3

  Docker: Creates backend_1, backend_2, backend_3
          DNS load‑balances automatically. ✅ Requests distributed across replicas

7. docker network connect equifox-net pg16.  what does this command do
   connects an already running container named pg16 to the Docker network equifox-net allowing it to communicate with other containers on that network using Docker’s 
   internal DNS without restarting the container. Docker allows a container to belong to multiple networks.
   So after this command: pg16 may still be on its original network AND also on equifox-net. This is called multi‑network attachment.
     ✅ Container pg16 becomes part of the equifox-net network
     ✅ pg16 gets:
       A new IP address on equifox-net
       A network interface on that network
       DNS visibility to other containers on equifox-net
     ✅ pg16 can:
        Communicate with other containers on equifox-net
        Be accessed by container name (pg16)

8. Difference between docker run --network equifox-net pg16  and  docker network connect equifox-net pg16
   docker run --network equifox-net  creates a container and attaches to equifox-net network , while docker network connect equifox-net pg16 attaches an already running
   container to equifox-net network without restarting it. The latter is especially useful for multi‑network setups and live fixes.
   When to use docker network connect
    ✅ Add a database to an app network
    ✅ Attach a debug container
    ✅ Connect legacy containers
    ✅ Temporary production fixes
    ✅ Multi‑tier networking designs

9. explain   docker compose -f docker-compose.optionB.fixed.yml up --build
   is used to build and start a multi‑container application defined in a specific Docker Compose file. 
   1️⃣ docker compose
     Invokes Docker Compose (v2), which is built into Docker CLI
     Used to manage multi‑container applications
    🔹 Note: This is the modern replacement for docker-compose

   2️⃣ -f docker-compose.optionB.fixed.yml
      Specifies a custom Compose file
      Overrides the default file name (docker-compose.yml)
      ✅ This allows you to:
          Maintain multiple configurations (OptionA, OptionB, prod, dev, fixed, etc.)
          Choose which setup to run at execution time
          example:
                 docker compose -f docker-compose.dev.yml up
                 docker compose -f docker-compose.prod.yml up

   3️⃣ up
      Creates networks, volumes, and containers
      Starts all defined services
      Attaches logs to the terminal (unless -d is used)
    Equivalent steps:
        Create network(s)
        Create container(s)
        Start container(s)
        Stream logs to stdout

   4️⃣ --build
       Forces Docker to rebuild images before starting containers. Only images defined via Dockerfile are rebuilt. Services using image: (like postgres:16) are not rebuilt
       Even if images already exist
       ✅ This is useful when:
          Dockerfile was modified
          Application code changed
          Dependencies changed
          You want to ensure the latest build is used

Stop and remove everything:         docker compose -f docker-compose.optionB.fixed.yml down
Rebuild without cache:              docker compose -f docker-compose.optionB.fixed.yml build --no-cache        then run 
Start services (foreground)         docker compose -f docker-compose.optionB.fixed.yml up
Start services (background)         docker compose -f docker-compose.optionB.fixed.yml up -d
Run a single service:               docker compose -f docker-compose.optionB.fixed.yml up app

10. Difference between
    docker compose up -> builds and starts all services and creates everything needed.
    docker compose run -> executes a one‑off command in a new temporary container.
    docker compose start -> starts only existing stopped containers without rebuilding or recreating them.
    
11. difference between
    docker compose stop -> halts running containers without removing them.
    docker compose down -> stops and removes containers and networks.

12. docker exec -it pg16 psql -U postgres  
    This command opens an interactive PostgreSQL (psql) session inside a running Docker container named pg16, logging in as the postgres user.
    Especially useful when PostgreSQL is not exposed via ports or you want direct container access.
    ✅ docker exec
       Executes a command inside a running container
       The container must already be up and running
    ✅ -it :  -it allows you to type commands interactively, like a real shell.
    ✅ pg16
        Name (or ID) of the Docker container
        Typically refers to a PostgreSQL 16 container
    ✅ psql
        PostgreSQL’s command‑line client
        Used to run SQL commands, manage databases, inspect schemas, etc.
    ✅ -U postgres
        Specifies the database user
        postgres is the default superuser in PostgreSQL

  🔹 Common Variations
    ✅ Connect to a specific database:    docker exec -it pg16 psql -U postgres mydb
    ✅ Open a shell first, then run psql:  docker exec -it pg16 bash
                                            psql -U postgres

  🔹 Important Notes
     ❌ Container must be running
     ❌ psql must be installed inside the container (it is by default in Postgres images)
     ✅ Authentication works because the command runs inside the container

13. 
    
    
   

