1. gcloud auth list
    gcloud auth list displays all Google Cloud accounts that are currently authenticated on your local machine and shows which account is active. who am I?
    In simple terms: It tells you who is logged in to the gcloud CLI. it allows you to Check active account
    🔹 Switch Active Account, If you have multiple accounts and want to switch:
        gcloud config set account admin@company.com

🔹 Related Commands (Very Useful)
    ✅ Login to a new account:  gcloud auth login
    ✅ Activate service account (for automation):  gcloud auth activate-service-account --key-file=service-account-key.json
    ✅ Remove an account: gcloud auth revoke user@example.com

  In GCP, authentication (account) and configuration (project) are separate. After checking accounts, also check project: gcloud config list project
  Set project if needed: gcloud config set project my-project-id

  🔹 Real‑World Scenario: You run a deployment command and get a permission error. First thing to check: gcloud auth list
        ✅ Maybe the wrong account is active
        ✅ Switch to the correct one and retry

    🔹 Common Mistakes ❌
❌ Assuming the last logged‑in account is active
❌ Forgetting to switch accounts before production work
❌ Confusing project permissions with authentication

2. gcloud config list project
    gcloud config list project displays the Google Cloud project that is currently set as active in your local gcloud CLI configuration. in short it allows you to 
    check active project. where am I working
    If the project is missing or incorrect:  gcloud config set project new-project-id
    🔹 Override Project Temporarily (Per Command): Instead of changing global config, you can do:        gcloud compute instances list --project=some-other-project
        ✅ Useful in scripts or multi‑project environments

    🔹 Real‑World Scenario: You run a deploy command and it fails or deploys to the wrong environment.
        First checks:   gcloud auth list
                        gcloud config list project

   ✅ List all configs:      gcloud config list


3. User Accounts vs Service Accounts (GCP)
    🔹 High‑Level Difference: User accounts are for humans interacting with GCP, while service accounts are for applications and automated processes.
    🔹 What is a Service Account? A service account is a non‑human identity used by: Applications, Virtual machines, CI/CD pipelines, Kubernetes workloads
        Example: my-service@my-project.iam.gserviceaccount.com
     Service accounts are used when: A VM accesses Cloud Storage, A Kubernetes Pod accesses Pub/Sub, A CI/CD pipeline deploys to GCP, A backend talks to another GCP service.
    ✅ Authentication (Service Account): gcloud auth activate-service-account --key-file=service-account-key.json 
        or recommended (no keys): Attached automatically to: Compute Engine, GKE, Cloud Run, App Engine.
    ✅ Why Service Accounts Are Safer: ✔ No passwords, ✔ Scoped permissions, ✔ Can be rotated, ✔ Fully auditable, ✔ Principle of least privilege.


4.  Explain gcloud configurations
    gcloud configurations let you maintain multiple named sets of CLI settings (like active account, project, region, zone) on the same machine and switch between them instantly.
      In simple terms: configurations = profiles for the gcloud CLI.
    ✅ Why configurations are needed
        Without configurations, you’d constantly: 
            Switch projects manually
            Switch accounts manually
            Risk running commands in the wrong environment (e.g., prod)
        With configurations, you can safely separate:
            dev / qa / prod
            personal / work accounts
            different client projects

    ✅ What does a configuration store?
        Each configuration can store values like:
            Account (user or service account)
            Project
            Region
            Zone
            Other CLI preferences
        Each configuration is isolated from the others.
    ✅ Default configuration (always exists)
        When you install gcloud, it creates: default
        to check it run:        gcloud config configurations list
    ✅ Common configuration commands 
        🔹 Create a new configuration:                    gcloud config configurations create dev
        🔹 Activate (switch to) a configuration:          gcloud config configurations activate dev
        🔹 Set values in a configuration:                 gcloud config set project my-dev-project
                                                          gcloud config set account dev-user@company.com
                                                          gcloud config set compute/region asia-south1
                                                          gcloud config set compute/zone asia-south1-a
        These settings apply only to the active configuration
        🔹 Delete a configuration:                        gcloud config configurations delete dev
        
            
5.   gcloud services list --available  
        ✅ It shows which Google Cloud services you can enable in your project. 
        Once you find the service you need: gcloud services enable compute.googleapis.com                //This allows you to start using that service in the project.
        ✅ List enabled services (active):                gcloud services list
        ✅ Describe a specific service:                   gcloud services describe compute.googleapis.com
        🔹 Filter Available Services
            ✅ Search for Kubernetes‑related services:    gcloud services list --available | grep container
            ✅ Filter by name:                            gcloud services list --available --filter="NAME:cloudrun"


        🔹 Real‑World Example Scenario
            You want to deploy a GKE cluster, but the command fails.
            Steps to troubleshoot:
                gcloud services list --available | grep container
                Confirm container.googleapis.com exists. Enable it if required.
               🔹 Permissions Required: To run or act on this command, you need:
                    roles/serviceusage.viewer → to list services
                    roles/serviceusage.admin → to enable services
                    Without permissions: PERMISSION_DENIED
        Always verify: gcloud config list project

6. gcloud compute zones list
    ✅ It tells you which zones exist in GCP and whether they are available to deploy resources.
    ✅ List zones in a specific region:         gcloud compute zones list --filter="region:(asia-south1)"


            
7. What is BigQuery in GCP?
    BigQuery is Google Cloud Platform’s fully managed, serverless, distributed data warehouse designed for large‑scale data analytics.
    In simple terms: BigQuery is used to run SQL queries on massive datasets (GBs–PBs) very fast, without managing servers or databases.
    🔹 Key Characteristics of BigQuery
        ✅ Serverless (no infrastructure to manage)
        ✅ Handles terabytes to petabytes of data
        ✅ Uses standard SQL
        ✅ Columnar storage
        ✅ Extremely fast for read‑heavy analytical queries
        ✅ Pay‑as‑you‑query or flat‑rate pricing

    What BigQuery Is Typically Used For
        Data warehousing, Analytics & reporting, Business intelligence (BI), Log analysis, Event analytics, ML data preparation.
    Examples: Website clickstream analysis, Sales and revenue analytics, IoT data analysis, Marketing campaign analysis.

✅ How BigQuery Is Different from Regular SQL Databases
    1. Purpose: Analytics vs Transactions (MOST IMPORTANT)
            Aspect            BigQuery                        Regular SQL DB
            Designed for    Analytics (OLAP)                Transactions (OLTP)
            Query type      Large scans, aggregations       Small row‑based queries
            Typical         usersAnalysts, data teams       Applications, APIs
            Type            Data Warehouse                    Relational DB
            Workload            OLAP                            OLTP
    2. BigQuery can query billions of rows in seconds
       Regular SQL databases slow down at that scale
    3. Architecture Differences
            Regular SQL Databases                               BigQuery
        Row‑based storage                                    Columnar storage    
        Runs on fixed servers                                Serverless
        You manage: CPU, Memory, Disk, Replication           Google manages everything
        
    4. Performance: Big query is faster(parallel column scans)
    5. Data Ingestion & Schema
            BigQuery                                    Regular SQL
        Schema‑on‑read                                Schema‑on‑write
        Can load: CSV, JSON, Parquet                 Tables must be strictly defined
        Supports nested & repeated fields
    
        BigQuery is more flexible for evolving datasets.
    






Distributed execution engine

✅ Columnar storage = faster aggregations
✅ Only reads required columns (less I/O)

---------------------------------------------------------KUBERNETES---------------------------------------------------------
0. 1️⃣ Problems Kubernetes Solves (Before vs After)
	   		Before Kubernetes, teams building microservices had to build or buy solutions for: 
				Problem						Before Kubernetes					With Kubernetes
			Load balancing				L4/L7 proxies						Native Services
			Service discovery			Eureka / Consul						DNS‑based
			Scaling						Custom autoscaling code				HPA
			Deployments					Blue‑green tools					Rolling updates
			Environment drift			Config per VM						ConfigMaps & Secrets
			Infra dependency			Tight coupling						Cloud‑agnostic

	   		Kubernetes standardizes these concerns at the platform level.
   
   2️⃣ Microservices Design Patterns Kubernetes Replaces (or Internalizes)
		Kubernetes doesn’t “kill” microservices patterns — it moves them from application code into infrastructure.
		1. Service Discovery Pattern (Mostly Replaced)
			Before Kubernetes: Netflix Eureka, Consul, Zookeeper, Custom discovery libraries
			Each service had to: Register itself, Discover others, Handle failures.
			With Kubernetes: Native DNS-based service discovery
			Every Service gets: service-name.namespace.svc.cluster.local	
				✅ No registration code
				✅ No discovery client
				✅ No heartbeat logic
			Status: ✅ Replaced by Kubernetes Service + DNS
			
		2. Client‑Side Load Balancing (Replaced)
			Before Kubernetes: Ribbon, Custom round‑robin logic, Application SDKs for load balancing
			With Kubernetes: kube‑proxy handles load balancing, Service distributes traffic to Pods
			✅ App doesn’t choose instances
			✅ No LB libraries inside code
			Status: ✅ Moved to Kubernetes networking layer

		3. Self‑Healing Pattern (Replaced)
			Before Kubernetes: Supervisord, custom watchdogs, cron restart jobs
			With Kubernetes: Liveness probes, Readiness probes, Controllers continuously reconcile desired state
			Status: ✅ Fully replaced
	

	run below command in powershell
1. kubectl get nodes: The command kubectl get nodes lists all the nodes (machines) in a Kubernetes cluster along with their status, roles, age, and Kubernetes version.
    Nodes are the workers in a Kubernetes cluster: Pods run on nodes, If a node is unhealthy, applications may fail, Cluster troubleshooting usually starts here.
    This command helps you: Verify cluster connectivity, Check node health, See how many nodes you have, Confirm worker vs control‑plane nodes.
    ✅ Show more details: kubectl get nodes -o wide
    ✅ Describe a specific node (deep debugging):  kubectl describe node <node-name>
    ✅ Filter by labels: kubectl get nodes --show-labels

    🔹 Real‑World Scenarios: run the command in below scenarios
        ✅ After cluster creation
        ✅ Application not scheduling
        ✅ After adding nodes

        nodes = machines
        pods  = workloads. smallest deployable unit

2. kubectl get pods -A
    It shows every running (or stopped) Pod in the entire cluster, not just in your current namespace. -A means All namespaces (same as --all-namespaces).
    🔹 Why -A Is Important: By default, Kubernetes commands operate in one namespace only (usually default).
        kubectl get pods                 // shows pods only in the current namespace
     kubectl get pods -A -o wide         // shows more details
    ✅ Filter by namespace:               kubectl get pods -n kube-system
    ✅ Find failing pods :                kubectl get pods -A | grep -v Running
    ✅ Check only specific namespaces:    kubectl get pods -n default

    🔹 Real‑World Troubleshooting Example
        ❌ Application is not accessible.
        Steps:
            1. kubectl get pods -A

3. kubectl config get-contexts
     It tells you which clusters, users, and namespaces your kubectl can connect to, and which one is active right now and configured in your kubeconfig file.
     🔹 Why this command is important: In real‑world Kubernetes usage you often work with:
        multiple clusters (dev / qa / prod)
        multiple cloud providers (GKE / EKS / AKS / On‑prem)
        multiple users or service accounts
    This command helps you: avoid operating in the wrong cluster, verify your current kubectl context, safely switch between environments.
    ⚠️ Many production incidents happen because someone ran a command in the wrong context.
    ✅ kubectl commands always run in the active context unless overridden. 
    🔹 What is a Kubernetes Context?
        A context is a combination of:
            Cluster → where the API server is
            User → who you are
            Namespace → default scope
    🔹 Switch to a Different Context:    kubectl config use-context prod-context
        Verify:                           kubectl config current-context
    🔹 Use Context Temporarily (Safe Practice):   kubectl --context=qa-context get pods
            ✅ Avoids accidental changes
            ✅ Recommended for production operations
    🔹 Real‑World Scenario: You intend to scale a deployment in dev, but accidentally scale prod.
            ✅ First thing to check:    kubectl config get-contexts
            ✅ Confirm active context before executing commands.

4.  What is a Namespace?
    A namespace is a Kubernetes resource used to logically isolate workloads inside a single cluster. 
    What namespaces control?
        Resource names (can repeat across namespaces)
        Access control (RBAC)
        Quotas & limits
        Resource organization (dev, qa, prod)

    ✅ Common namespaces:  kubectl get namespaces
        output: default, kube-system, kube-public, monitoring, prod.

5. kubectl create deployment nginx-demo --image=nginx
	This command means Create a Deployment named nginx-demo that runs the nginx container image.
	✅ What exactly gets created?
		1️⃣ Deployment (main object)
		2️⃣ ReplicaSet (created automatically)
		3️⃣ Pod (runs the container)
	✅ This command roughly translates to the following YAML. Kubernetes creates this for you automatically, You didn’t have to write YAML
		apiVersion: apps/v1
		kind: Deployment
		metadata:
		  name: nginx-demo
		spec:
		  replicas: 1
		  selector:
		    matchLabels:
		      app: nginx-demo
		  template:
		    metadata:
		      labels:
		        app: nginx-demo
		    spec:
		      containers:
		      - name: nginx
		        image: nginx


✅ How to verify what was created
	kubectl get deployments							// Check the Deployment
	kubectl get pods								// Check the Pod
    kubectl describe deployment nginx-demo			// Describe for details

✅ Can you access nginx now?
	No — not yet. Why?
		Pods are internal
		No Service is created
	To expose it:  kubectl expose deployment nginx-demo --type=NodePort --port=80
		the command means Create a Service for the nginx-demo Deployment and expose it on every node’s IP using a high port, forwarding traffic to container port 80.
		This command creates a Service object:
			apiVersion: v1
			kind: Service
			metadata:
			  name: nginx-demo
			spec:
			  type: NodePort
			  selector:
			    app: nginx-demo
			  ports:
			  - port: 80
			    targetPort: 80
			    nodePort: 300XX

		Traffic flow:
			Client → NodeIP:NodePort → Service → Pod → Nginx

		Example access: http://<node-ip>:30080
		
		✅	Why NodePort Is Not Recommended in Production ?
			1️⃣ No Load Balancer: Kubernetes does not distribute traffic across nodes for NodePort.
			2️⃣ Direct Node Exposure (Security Risk)
			3️⃣ No TLS / HTTPS by Default
			4️⃣ Cloud‑native networking has evolved (2026). In 2026, production Kubernetes expects: Ingress, Service Mesh, Gateway API, mTLS, Policy‑driven networking.
				 NodePort is a legacy exposure method.
				 Kubernetes Ingress vs Gateway API:
					Ingress = legacy, simple, app‑focused
					Gateway API = modern, extensible, platform‑grade
	
		✅ What Production Uses INSTEAD (2026)
			Option 1: Ingress (Most Common)	
					  Client → HTTPS → Ingress → Service (ClusterIP) → Pod
		
			Option 2: LoadBalancer Service
					  kubectl expose deployment nginx-demo --type=LoadBalancer --port=80
		
			Option 3: Gateway API (Modern Standard – 2026)
					  The successor to Ingress:
						Stronger API guarantees
						Better multi‑team control
						Native traffic policies
						Designed for platform engineering
					This is now the strategic direction of Kubernetes networking.
		
		✅	When NodePort IS Acceptable in 2026
				Still valid for: 
				  Local environments: Minikube, Kind, K3s on laptop.
				  Debugging: Temporary access, Incident response.
				  On‑prem.
	
✅ When should you use kubectl create deployment?
	Learning Kubernetes, Quick tests, PoCs, Interviews & demos
	❌ Not ideal for: Production setups, GitOps workflows, Complex configs (resources, env vars, probes).

✅ For Production use below command
	 kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml


5. GKE steps to follow to deploy a microservice
        1.  gcloud services enable container.googleapis.com artifactregistry.googleapis.com 
        2.  set environment variables like PROJECT_ID, REGION, ZONE, CLUSTER, REPO, APP. 
        		gcloud config set project $PROJECT_ID 
        		gcloud config set compute/zone $ZONE 
        3.  Create GKE cluster 
        		gcloud container clusters create %CLUSTER% --num-nodes=2 --machine-type=e2-medium --zone %ZONE%
        4.  Get kubeconfig credentials 
        		gcloud container clusters get-credentials %CLUSTERS% --zone %ZONE%
        		kubectl get nodes
        5.  Create Artifact Registry repo: 
        		gcloud artifacts repositories create %REPO% --repository-format=docker --location=%REGION% 
        6.  Configure Docker auth: 
        		gcloud auth configure-docker %REGION%-docker.pkg.dev 
        7.  create image format and build and push image
        		set IMAGE_V1="%REGION%-docker.pkg.dev/%PROJECT_ID%/%REPO%/%APP%:v1" 
        		docker build -t %IMAGE_V1% . 
        		docker push %IMAGE_V1% 
        8.  Deploy microservice to GKE 
        		1. deployment.yaml - How your application runs
					A Deployment defines how your application should run inside the cluster. It Ensures the desired number of pods is always running, Restarts failed pods,
					Supports rolling updates and rollbacks. Kubernetes keeps 3 pods running at all times. It answers questions like:
						Which container image to run?
						How many copies (pods) should run?
						How to update the app without downtime?
						What if a pod crashes?
				
        		2. service.yaml	- How users access your application
					Pods have Dynamic IPs, Short lifetimes, So you cannot rely on pod IPs to reach your app.
					A Service.yaml provides a stable network endpoint and Load balancing across pods.
					It Exposes your application inside or outside the cluster. 
					Routes traffic to healthy pods. Load-balances requests automatically

        		3. hpa.yaml - How your app scales automatically
					Traffic is not constant:
						Peak hours → high CPU
						Off hours → waste resources
					HPA (Horizontal Pod Autoscaler) automatically adjusts pod count and Monitors metrics (CPU/memory).

				✅ Real-world analogy
					Think of a restaurant:
						Deployment → Kitchen staff (how many cooks, replacement if someone leaves)
						Service → Reception counter (customers don’t go directly to kitchen)
						HPA → Hiring/removing cooks based on crowd


					
		
